Speaker 1 (00:00):
There's so many zillions of startups trying to try every single angle and opportunity in that area. And so the marginal return to investing your personal time in terms of the impact on the world might be relatively smaller there. Whereas there's this whole space that I feel like is really under-explored. And if you just make it 80% making a profit and 20% making a statement that opens up all kinds of incredible opportunities. Hello, and welcome to Metta, muse, muse as a tool for thought on iPad. This podcast isn't about use the product it's about music, the company, and the small team behind it. I'm Adam Wiggins joined by mark Brannigan, Adam and mark. Since we last spoke, I am a father. Congrats. Yeah, it's great. Or at least the non-slip private parts are great. I'm actually on parental leave right now, but I enjoy doing this podcast enough. 

Speaker 1 (00:56):
I thought I could sneak back for just an hour here, but if my brain is not at full capacity, let's just say you'll have to carry things for us. Okay. Now, way back in episode four, we talked about our partnership model and the context there was, we were hiring the fifth member of our team, our engineering partner, and I'm happy to say we have through that process, we added Adam Wolf to the team, really great engineer with a particular specialty and thinking, which is quite important for us. And he's been doing great on the team. So we're now five. And in the course of that, of course, we talked about kind of the nature of the company and how it's different from other models, particularly the startup model. But I thought it would be good to both first take an episode to talk more explicitly about what this somewhat unusual business structure we chose was. 

Speaker 1 (01:44):
And then also it's been year and a half actually coming up on two years now, since we started this thing. And so being able to essentially say, how's it going? Is this working out the way that we expected? And just to frame things up a little bit, a starting place, and a point of inspiration for both of us is a book called small giants. And I read this many, many years ago. I think when I was in my startup lifestyle, I would say, but it had a big impact on me and the book basically profiles, a bunch of let's call them businesses that are, maybe have an outsized impact, but they're less about huge size or making it to the S and P 500 or something like that. So for example, they have cliff bars in there, or whole foods, which I think at the time the book was wrote was really kind of an up and comer, independent up and comer or union square cafe, which is quite kind of unique restaurant in the New York area. 

Speaker 1 (02:38):
They since expanded to other locations and the process of profiling these businesses, they showed kind of a, maybe an alternate to, I think they're thinking more on alternate to the standard kind of public company path. But I, at least for me, I read it as an alternate to the startup world, which at the time I was just completely immersed in that was kind of the only way to do with the startup way. And this book suggested another path. Yeah. That book was quite influential on me as well. So Adam, I'm curious, what, from the book, did you find yourself taking away the most and applying to your future ventures? Yeah. Well, in prep for this episode, I went and pulled out my Kindle highlights as a PDF and scan through those a bit. And I have to say, I'm not sure it's actually a great book in terms of how it's written, but there's just a couple of core ideas that really hit home. 

Speaker 1 (03:28):
One of those is they talk about businesses with soul or another term. They use quite a bit as mojo. Just kind of a funny one. Yeah. They talk about optimizing for mojo overgrowth and growth. Of course, a business exists to earn money. That's its kind of practical function in the economy and growth typically goes with that. It's almost a requirement sort if you're not growing you're stagnating and that is taken to a real extreme in the startup world. I mean, Paul Graham even has an essay startup equals growth, which just says that is your sole purpose for being grow, grow, grow fast as you can. And the counterpoint, this book presents is mojo and expressing something kind of artistically and having the soul is something you can choose. Of course you still need to pay attention to the business fundamentals. You do still need to grow, but you can choose to have maybe a different balance where you say, you know what, this mojo thing we want to optimize for that and have enough growth to be successful, but not have it be growth at the cost of absolutely every other thing. 

Speaker 1 (04:35):
Yeah, exactly. For me, there are a few layers here. There's that first layer of, okay, you don't necessarily need to be a huge business or to grow really fast is a sort of mechanical matter. There are existence proofs of businesses that haven't gotten huge or growing that fast. They're doing just fine. Okay. That's great. It's kind of the first layer then there's this mojo idea of you can use the business as a vehicle to accomplish something non-monetary to make a statement, to do an artistic expression. And that's something that, that was really important to me in starting this venture. I'm gonna spend the next 2, 5, 10 years of my moral life working on this. I want it to be about something more than making money. And then there's kind of a third layer. I don't know how much they get into this in the book and if he would even agree. 

Speaker 1 (05:15):
But I think there's a sort of arbitrage here where there are so few businesses that are operating with mojo as it were that you can have a sort of outsize impact if you choose to do so and do it well, this is where I think the small giants can punch above their weight class. It's because so few people are actually operating with this mojo, this sense of artistic expression that when you do you really stand out, even if you're smaller and there's some examples of companies that come to mind for you that are high mojo top of mind for me these days is signal. I'm not sure if that's the company name or the app name, but I'm referring to the company that makes the signal app. And I would expect they're quite small, not actually sure about the size of the firm, but it can't be that big, but the impact that they're having on the global discussion around the right of citizens to communicate privately is huge and they could choose to have a huge impact going forward. 

Speaker 1 (06:06):
So that's one of the top of mind for you these days when it comes to mind for me is panic. So they make kind of a variety of weird things, including, I don't know, FTP clients, but also games. And now I think they're working on a handheld game console and probably an example of a company that does have both mojo and a lot of growth, but maybe they took their time with that. That growth happened over a relatively speaking, a pretty long time period and can build up slowly over time. Another one I remember you speaking about when we talked about this before, is Vanguard, tell me more about the unusual structure there. Cause I wasn't familiar with it. Yeah. So Vanguard is like one of the greatest business hacks of all time. And I feel like it's an understudied story. So my understanding of Vanguard is the founder. 

Speaker 1 (06:53):
I believe his last name was Bogel, wanted to make investing more accessible and more successful for individual retail investors. And he had this insight around indexing whereby if you index into the market and operate those index funds at a very low cost way, it will be very beneficial to the people who are investing. Now, he could have taken this insight and developed a huge and hugely profitable firm with it. But my understanding of what he did instead was he did this move where the firm is effectively owned by the people who invest in the funds. So essentially all the profits that would get plowed back into the funds in the form of lower fees. So he basically forgoes a huge personal fortune to help bring low cost index investing to the masses. And then it got to the point where it was so successful and it becomes quite hard to compete as a for-profit indexing firm because you can't fly all your profits back into lower fees, right. 

Speaker 1 (07:50):
Or at least your investors wouldn't approve necessarily. And that's kind of the sense of almost art that he's shared with the world in the form of this somewhat unassailable venture to bring low cost investing to the masses index funds, you know, S and P 500 ETFs, guess what they're called nowadays is this huge technology, or maybe you call it a social technology or just a financial tool or something, but it had this huge democratizing effect for individual investors compared to the managed mutual funds that came before. And yeah, the art almost art, as you say, you know, for me, that is the reason I am in business, as it is a vehicle for expressing something that matters to me about how I think the world should be or how it could be better. And the business and the mechanics of all that, how it's incorporated, how it's funded, how it earns money, all that stuff is really a means to an end. 

Speaker 1 (08:41):
Right? So optimizing for mojo businesses, with soul expressing something artistically, that all sounds nice. What does this mean practically in terms of the business that you're building and here you start to think about these mechanics, which is okay, you've got a of people and you've got a thing they want to express product. They want to bring into the world or a piece of art. They want to create, depending on how you want to think about it. That needs time, it needs money, it needs organization. And that leads you into what I usually think of as kind of a container or a vehicle, which is typically a legal entity. It could be a corporation or a nonprofit. Um, and then there are certain models that fit with different kinds of businesses. So for example, if you're going to open a restaurant and for a lot of people creating certain kind of food and a certain kind of environment that is very much an artistic activity for them, you certainly see that if you watch something like the Netflix series chef's table on kind of the high end, but I think even more of your local corner restaurant, many times, those businesses are not very lucrative. 

Speaker 1 (09:42):
They're open because people are really passionate about food and sharing a certain kind of experience with their customers. But there's probably a certain kind of legal entity, your forum, and you'll probably get funding as a small bank loan or some other things like that. And that's extremely different from, let me start a startup move to Silicon valley, join Y Combinator, get venture funding. And ultimately you still have the legal entity, a source of funding in a way to hire people or bringing team members on board and the sort of mission they're signing up to that they have mechanics of them are very, very different. And there's, you know, there's a list of other things as well, including nonprofits or even pure artistic activities, art projects, burning man art installations, or you're starting a band or some, you know, writing a book or something like that, all of these need capital and ways to organize people. 

Speaker 1 (10:30):
And there's legal mechanisms for that. And so knowing both the mechanisms, but also what you want to express and therefore, what is the right vehicle for that? I think that's worth thinking through rather than reaching for a default, which is, I don't know, everyone starts startups. I'll start a startup for example. Yep. Well now you got me thinking about the wall street, best stuff that's going on on Reddit. And that case, I guess the optimal vehicle was a series of memes. That's right. I do think it's ever evolving and they mostly mean that it's a joke, but honestly, the internet has brought us some new structures, right? We have Kickstarter for example, Patrion and there's new ways potentially to end the end. It is really about organizing groups of people. Probably if you're solo artist, you're painting, you're painting, you're doing something individual. Maybe this stuff matters less. 

Speaker 1 (11:16):
But as soon as you have a group of people over time that are investing their energy, their effort, their emotion, and certainly their money, then you need mechanisms governance and understanding for both what we're going to put into this and what we expect to get out of it and what our goals are and all that sort of thing. So that brings us to the vehicle we created for muse, which I think borrows elements from some of the different types of containers we've mentioned, but we think also has its own special blend. Can you explain a little bit what that container looks like? Yeah. So first of all, we did believe that muse needed to be a commercial entity. And the main reason was, well, maybe two main reasons. One is need a significant amount of investment to develop a novel product like muse and bring it to market. 

Speaker 1 (11:59):
We're talking about three to five engineers and three, five staff members for one to three years. So it's not something you could do as a pure art project. You know, say, furthermore, if you have this vision of impacting the world in a particular way, it helps to have ongoing self-sustaining funding for it. So that's another reason to make this a business versus a nonprofit or an our project. The meat of what makes me use unique is how we treat the staff and the other participants around the business. And the top of the thing there was, we wanted them use to be the place that we wanted to work and the place that we wanted our collaborators to work. And that meant a few things. One is we want it to be a relatively small team, which has a bunch of implications that we can talk about. 

Speaker 1 (12:45):
We wanted everyone to feel like peers who are at the top of their craft and operating at the top of their game. And we wanted everyone to be treated as well and as fairly as possible. And in particular, we didn't want to sort of found our class versus an employee class where they're very different as in typical startups. And lastly, we wanted the sense of dynamism and the staff and the team where people come in, they go, and that's a very natural thing to happen and you're less kind of bound and handcuffed to the company. And furthermore, you're also not constrained in how far you can rise in terms of your impact and your influence and your ownership just by virtue of when you joined, it's more a function of your contributions and commitment to the company. So those were kind of our goals that inform the structure and then in terms of where we ended up, well, first of all, we did end up with a Delaware C Corp, which is the standard vehicle for startups among other things, mostly because that's the best understood by all the potential participants, staff, investors, and has the best support for people having ownership of variety of people, having ownership in the firm, which was really important to us. 

Speaker 1 (13:48):
But then when we went in a quite different direction, was this idea of a partner. So a typical startup, you have sort of three classes of people. You have the investors, you have the founders, and then you have all the employees and they're all treated very differently and have different economics in the firm. And they're a function of kind of how you join, how you come to be participating in the firm. And we won this model like I was alluding to before, where it's more like the staff members are peers with each other and have the opportunity to rise to that level over time, regardless of when they joined. So that's where our partner model comes in, which is sort of drawn from the world of professional services firms like law firms and accounting firms. And the idea there is if you start a law firm, you get to put your name on the sign because you started it and you're a partner by the way, presumably, but also over time, people can join and through their contributions to the firm and their commitment and their taking responsibility for the success of the business overall, they can eventually become a partner just like the founding partners. 

Speaker 1 (14:47):
So that's sort of the idea that we have with the media partner. They're someone who can a peer with the other partners and have corresponding responsibilities at the firm. So it's not just that you're responsible for being a good engineer. You're responsible for helping basically direct how the business operates, making big business decisions and things like that. And you have corresponding economic interest in the business, much more so on a percentage basis and a typical employee would have. So I guess if I had to summarize what the partner, it's the idea of, we want everyone to act like a real owner in the business. And in order to do that fairly, you need to actually make them a real owner in the business. One way to understand the business structure or how the container is different is to compare and contrast with other options. You mentioned taking investment. 

Speaker 1 (15:33):
We did take some seed funding from a lovely firm called Harrison metal, who happily turned out to be understanding, or at least willing to try out our weird model here, but you could compare to other ways of doing this. So bootstrapping for example, and there's few different approaches on this, I've done this in past businesses where you essentially do consulting work on the side, or maybe it's kind of related to, you can try to sell your product to someone that you sort of do some consulting with them at the same time that like helps you pay the bills until such time as the product is self-sustaining or something. You see a lot in the iOS developer world is these what I call these indie devs. Many times they have multiple apps, but it's usually one person or maybe two people tops. And they can craft an app in a pretty short amount of time, a few months, maybe they're doing it on the side. 

Speaker 1 (16:20):
Maybe they have other kind of some passive income from existing apps. They're just doing it in their extra time, alongside a job. And they can do that reasonably in six months, put it out on the app store and then start making not a huge amount of money, but enough to make it pretty worthwhile for a single person. But as you pointed out for muse, which has this, first of all, very sort of forward-thinking or trying to reinvent a lot of these gestures, the human computer interaction aspects, the tablet power user interface. That was just a big investment. First on the research side when we were in the research lab, but then even once we left the lab and we're trying to take this kind of validated, prototype it, turn it into a product people can really use that. Just took a lot of time, a lot of iterations in a way that let's say a safer kind of app wouldn't. 

Speaker 1 (17:05):
And similarly, there's something that I do think is common in the startup world, which is big investments in design and brand. And you expect this from slack and Tesla and apple, and certainly any up-and-comer startup. You have the money to be able to put a lot of effort into that sort of thing. And maybe we didn't want to be quite at that level, but I also felt that a lot of investment there was part of allowing this first part of what we wanted to express artistically, but then secondly, I think necessary for it to be successful. So that sort of says, okay, the iOS indie developer path or bootstrap path is really not viable. We need a little more upfront capital than that. And then you compare it to startups where in fact, by startup standards, the amount of money we've taken is ridiculously small. 

Speaker 1 (17:54):
I don't think it would even count as a pre-seed and furthermore, coming upon two years into this, we're a five person team with no particular plans to expand, but in the startup model, you're expected to really quickly scale out the team, be eight people, 10 people, 12 people in that first year or first two years. And so from that perspective, the five person team, we would be growing much too slow, but we felt that that rapid team growth, first of all, wasn't necessarily quite the kind of environment we wanted to work in. And second, it wasn't quite right for what we wanted to express with the product. And so we ended up in this middle ground that was neither the bootstrapper path nor the startup path. And that led us to thinking, okay, how do we get some investment, be able to make that investment and things like design and brand and exploring this more radical interface, but not necessarily go on the, you gotta become a unicorn startup path. 

Speaker 1 (18:49):
Yeah, exactly. Another way to think about the funding situation would be as you get more funding and you have more external investors and owners, you tend to have fewer degrees of freedom. So at the extreme end of you're a large publicly traded company in many respects, including basically legally at the whims of the owners, they can more or less insist that you act purely in their best judiciary interests. And if they don't like what you're doing, they can take over your company by various means. And at the other extreme, you would have the art project where you're in your house. You can do whatever you want. And, you know, in some respects, it's nice to be doing the art projects. You have infinite degrees of freedom, but then you don't necessarily have the capital and the collaborators and the teammates in a sense to help you accomplish a bigger mission. 

Speaker 1 (19:34):
So when we were looking at funding, the venture, we wanted to go in the direction of raising a little bit of funding, but no more than we kind of strictly needed to a and B in order to minimize the extent to which raising that funding impinged on the desired degrees of freedom. Affirm, we raised the funding from people who were aligned with our sense of mojo, if you will, or what we wanted to do with the venture. And we're there for not going to use the fact that they were investors and owners as a way to shape the business in a way that wouldn't fit with what we wanted to do. So being aligned with the investors was important. I think another piece of the puzzle on funding and money flow generally is that all businesses should go through this cycle of they need upfront capital. 

Speaker 1 (20:18):
Even if you're a lemonade stand, you got to get the lemons and the pitcher and the cups and the poster board and the markers. So you can make your sign. Everyone needs some amount of capital, but there's always this cycle where initially you're in the red, you've put in capital, but you haven't produced a functioning business yet. And you hopefully over time in that time period could be very long. I'm going to say for a business like Amazon, maybe it took them a decade plus to go to cashflow positive. Whereas maybe for more bootstrap things you expect to get there basically right away. But for us, we wanted to have enough capital to make these investments. We knew were necessary to even get a product that people would want to use or pay for, but it was also important to me, or it was part of what I want to do express with the business was to make a self-sustaining business where the product exists, because people are paying for it, not because of continuous injections of venture capital, right? 

Speaker 1 (21:16):
And partially, this is my experience in the startup world, both with my own companies and other companies I've advised, but in the end you will always serve the needs of the people who give you money. And that's just kind of the physics. You can resist that in some ways, but it's just kind of the longterm. You'll always converge to that. And so if your customers are the ones giving you money, then they're the ones you're serving. But of course they can't maybe putting aside some unusual cases of big Kickstarters or whatever. For the most part, you can't be completely customer funded to start. That's where professional investors can really help out. They want to give money to fledgling businesses for a chance at a return. And so that's a good deal. But if the startup path tends to be one where there's long, many, many injections of capital. 

Speaker 1 (22:05):
And so you're some ways I've seen the quite a joke or a criticism or something, but they say that startups in many cases, their product is their stock, but they're really trying to do is sell their stock and sell it forever increasing prices and the product that they give to users and maybe even charge for, but not enough to break even that is secondary. And I really wanted the other way around, which is course, we need to do our fiduciary duty to our investors and give them hopefully a solid return over time. But ultimately the sooner we can be funded by customer money rather than investor money, I think the more that will shape the company and the product that I want to make in a way that really is focused on serving customers. Yeah, for sure. And one of the reason that I liked that approach is I basically prefer to serve paying customers versus free customers. 

Speaker 1 (22:55):
In general. This goes back to kind of the patio 11 thing of you get what you're charged for something where customers who pay serious money for tools tend to be invested in them and want them to exceed and understand their value and things like that. So it's yet another reason to focus on paying customers. Yeah, it's a way to filter out people who really find a lot of value in your product from those that like free stuff. Everybody likes free stuff. That's fine. But I think a business and a product works out best. If you can have that real focus on here are the people that get the most value from what I'm doing. I'll note that I think it worked pretty well for us. This idea of we'll take this seed ish round, and then we'll try to use that to get to, if not profitability, at least kind of a sustainability, at least not be losing money. 

Speaker 1 (23:44):
And that really did create a lot of urgency on the team. I feel to charge sooner. And it was a challenge actually, because I think as craftspeople, you think, okay, I don't feel ready to charge money for this yet. I think it can be better. It still has bugs in it. There's so many features to add. It's a very natural thing when you hold yourself and your work to a high bar, but then you made this spreadsheet that basically mapped out cash and how we were spending it and what would happen if we started charting. And it really made a difference starting charging just a few months earlier because it really takes time to build up your customer base. And that is recurring over time. We could get to this sustainability on a trajectory that would allow us to not need to sort of go back to the well for, for more funds and, or just go out of business. 

Speaker 1 (24:30):
And that was really focusing. And I think it, it pushed us to charge a little sooner than maybe we would have otherwise. And that in turn, I think really changed our relationship with our users who are now customers, because now we have a different obligation to them. And I think that further focus our ability to make a good product. So overall, that kind of charge money sooner. And then in turn, try to grow into that price you're offering or that product you claim to be offering. For me, that was a really powerful focusing thing for the team and for the product. Yeah, I think that was big. And by the way, it was made all the more challenging by our take on pricing on iOS, part of the hypothesis about how this venture can work with a small team, a relatively modest amount of funding, but still reaching self-sustainability is a pro-sumer price level on that $10 a month, a hundred dollars a year range versus almost all iOS apps, which are $0, three hours, $5, maybe 9 99 is the wrong number of zeros to be able to make the physics of the business work. 

Speaker 1 (25:34):
And so at the same time, as we are craftspeople, who is tough to charge for it, product, that isn't where we want it to be. Eventually we're also dealing with the challenge of we're doing something quite different with iOS pricing. So it was dealing with two things at once there. Great. So we've got kind of this partnership model, small talent dense team. People are all owners in the business. We've got a small bit of seed funding, so we can do a bigger investment than a pure bootstrap thing, but something trying to get to sustainability sooner and not be on a long-term kind of multiple rounds of investment. And we've got pro-sumer pricing that potentially makes it possible to get to something sustainable for a five person team within kind of the physics of how many people are out there that need a tool like this and what they're willing to pay and that sort of thing. 

Speaker 1 (26:20):
So that was, I think kind of roughly the picture we put together, we wrote an internal memo that outlined mostly everything we just talked about back in the summer of 2018. So now the question becomes, okay, we're coming up on two years in, how's it going? Is this working the way we thought it would? Yeah, I think it's working out great so far. Now there is a huge mark around that financial success and viability of the business. We haven't fully demonstrated that yet. And that's a question mark, that's going to be out there. And until we have that information, it's hard to fully evaluate this model, right. But in terms of how it feels to work day and day and the staff that we've attracted, that feels great to me. And I especially love this feeling with the partnership model. They have five people who are operating at the top of their game and who you fully trust to make great decisions for the business independently. 

Speaker 1 (27:11):
That feeling is awesome and really helps us, I think, move quickly and punch above our weight. Even as a five person team kind of liked the, what I think of as the pirate ship model, kind of a group of people who band together for a common purpose, but it's not this top-down classic command and control one person's in charge. Everyone else just executes and individuals can pursue their own decision-making as you said, but the reality is, think, I don't know how it would be with even more than five, but certainly any, I dunno, before this, you were working at Stripe as part of a big team there and amazing company, but it's just there's hundreds or I don't know, even now thousands of people, and there has to be some coherence to the decision-making. And so that in turn leads you into cascading, OKR is, and all the big company stuff you think of it's necessary. 

Speaker 1 (28:01):
And, you know, I think it's necessary to do something at that scale, but for me personally, yeah, it is a lot more fun to make individual decisions from my own work. And then for my teammates to be able to trust that we have enough shared vision alignment around purposes, sense of trust in each other's capability as craftspeople, but also that we were seeking a similar outcome in the business and that people can have a lot of autonomy while at the same time we're working together for a common purpose. We're not making decisions that contradict each other or we'll make the whole thing feel code parent. Yeah, exactly. And furthermore, I think there's a sort of talent arbitrage that we've been able to pull off here in two respects. First of all, I think people are stepping into a level of responsibility and impact and skill that they wouldn't have stepped into so quickly or to such an extent if they were in a bigger organization where they had a more specialized and confined and limited and structured role. 

Speaker 1 (28:57):
And that's the result of you give people responsibility and you trust them with that and you make them big owners in the business and they take that very seriously and they tend to step up to the challenge if you find the right people. And second of all, I do think that the model is very attractive to some people and Alan put him on the spot here, but I think people have found their way to the venture that otherwise they're basically not hireable by general purpose companies, right? But because the model is so unique and attractive and because there is that mojo, I think you can bring people into the venture that otherwise you basically wouldn't have been able to hire for me looking back at this almost two years, we've been doing this slightly unusual model. I actually went to review the memo that we wrote back in summer of 2018, just to kind of look at our original goals and see the degree to which we've executed. 

Speaker 1 (29:41):
That persistence evolved. One interesting thing in there was essentially what the risks are open questions are. And I'm happy to say that two of those you've already answered in that intervening time, just as we've discussed, one is just our ability to raise money. So when we went out to look for seed funding from the kinds of investors who normally would invest in startups, and we had kind of a weird story where we basically said, look, this isn't unicorn potential. We're not trying to follow the standard startup model. We do think there's some then quite interesting here. We think there's a potentially a very good business here, but you know, we're explicitly not on that path. And we're looking for less money in exchange for less ownership, and we're not going to fit the normal model. And for many actually most investors, that was a, well, we like what you're doing it's but this just doesn't fit our model. 

Speaker 1 (30:26):
But we did manage to find some folks who liked what we were doing. And certainly it helped, I think, a lot that you and I have and others on the team, you know, we have a really nice CV in the tech world and the amount of money we were asking for was so small that people felt they could take a risk. I think that would be tougher to do without the career capital that we have in this particular team. And I would like to see if there are more businesses that can do with a model like this, it would be nice if it was more possible for people who didn't necessarily have the background of Stripe and Roku and whatever else to be able to get this kind of funding. So that's one item. Dearest is the raising of money. The other one is the ability to hire. 

Speaker 1 (31:03):
And I think I outlined that in the previous, the last episode on this, which at the time we'd just been joined by our fourth partner Leonard, but it's one is, can be an album. So I thought, okay, well, we got pretty lucky with that, that, and he really seemed interested in being not just great designer as he is, but also someone who would have brought ownership in the business and interested in all pieces of it, not just sort of specific discipline, can we replicate that? And the addition of Adam Wolf to the team made me say, okay, yeah, it seems we can, right. We got not just the original who wanted to do things this way, but then two more, we were able to attract, as you said, maybe even people we wouldn't have been able to hire if we were a slightly more conventional company that that was appealing to them. 

Speaker 1 (31:45):
And I do think it's not a highly skilled model, but a scalable enough to serve our purposes. And we have no plans to expand the team beyond five for the foreseeable future. But we also think that's the right number of people to execute on this vision. So from the perspective of answering those two risks, I would say that it's gone well, what are the other risks in the list? Uh, the other big one is the one that you just mentioned, which is can we get standability, right? Because I think that for the record, at the time of this recording, we are not revenue sustainable. Say, if we run out of our little nest egg in the bank here, we would not have enough to keep the business going, at least in its current form, but the graph is trending in the right direction. We have new customers every week. 

Speaker 1 (32:26):
And if you look at the way that the lines in terms of, you know, bank account going down revenue and new customers coming in, and we do think it is viable to get there, but we won't know until it happens. So I think that remains the biggest risk. And if we do start to get close to being in the red on the bank account, and then we have to ask question of, okay, you know, do we just sort of give up and go to business to be revenue based financing? Which could be interesting, but I think maybe we might not be the right ship of business for that. Or do we go back to Silicon valley investors, but now we're sort of like breaking our model, right? We're saying, well, we were just going to raise this one around and charge money right away and try to get to sustainability based on that. 

Speaker 1 (33:07):
But if we need to go and refresh from that, well, that pretty naturally takes us into just the startup path of raising perpetual rounds of funding. And your eventual outcome is acquisition by a larger company or in some cases going public. But I just don't think we have the right kind of business nor is what we want to express the sort of thing that makes sense for a big public company. Right. And yeah, and then addressing the more personal side of it, which is just creating this company, this vehicle, uh, that is a place we want to work. I like you wanted to be a little less of a manager, a little more of a maker. And it is interesting because, you know, we do spend a lot of time. I spend a lot of time tweaking CSS and manually typing expenses into QuickBooks, which is a perpetually rote and frustrating activity and many other small things that were how we raised a little more money on the startup path. 

Speaker 1 (34:03):
Yeah. We would be hiring office managers and other kinds of people. We would have a bigger team that would mean that we could do less of that stuff. You get more leverage or something like that, but that's actually what I wanted. I've gone both directions. And I think I'm at my best when I'm, I like being on a team that's really important to me. I want to do things that are big enough, that they require a team as opposed to just, you know, kind of a solo activity or even like a two person partnership. But I like to be on a very small team or you can be doing a lot, but most of what you're doing is making, I would call it rather than the management and leadership tasks that come naturally with the expansion of time. Yeah, totally. And I think in addition to this maker versus manager access and how that's influenced by the size of the team, I also think that a smaller team gives you more degrees of freedom, which is great. 

Speaker 1 (34:54):
If you're someone who just likes freedom, like maybe, but it's also great. If you want to do something unique that requires moving several variables at the same time. So for example, this local first idea that we're working on this idea that you have all the data on your device, and it's very quick to access and it's secure to you and things like that that requires pulling levers on engineering products, business strategy, the client side, the server side, interfacing with the research at the lab. There's all this stuff that you got to kind of pull together. And if you had to coordinate a bunch of people to do that with meetings and planning documents and all that, so it would take forever. It might just knock it done. Whereas if it's a small number of people or even one person, you're much more able to come up with these weird combinations of variables to novel results. 

Speaker 1 (35:38):
And that goes back to this idea of making a statement or building something you need for the world. Another element of degrees of freedom is outcomes. So outcomes could include you have a profitable business, but it could also include something like an acquisition or an IPO. The startup world, there's really the outcomes that matter are acquisition IPO, or go out of business and that sustainable, but moderately sized business is a non goal. That's actually a bad outcome from the perspective of investors. And the whole system is kind of built around that. You shared a nice article with me some years back called VC math chill link in the show notes, but the way the person puts it as venture capitalists in pushing these businesses to become a billion dollar company in 10 years, this is not because they're jerks it's because the model demands it. 

Speaker 1 (36:31):
This is how it works. That's where this money comes from. It's only possible if you push for these polarized outcomes and that's well and good, if you know what you're getting into and you're seeking that kind of go bigger bust result. But for the, I think potentially large number of potential mid-sized businesses, very solid mid-sized businesses. That's of course not a fit. And so by keeping that smaller amount of capital upfront, keeping the team smaller, we leave more possibilities for what counts as a good outcome. And so of course, we still can have a startup style outcome, and that might be something we considered good, but there's also other outcomes that I would consider extremely, but that in turn leads into, okay, how to investors, as well as the partners who have this significant equity stake, and in fact are taking lower salaries than they would in other places in order to get this equity stake. 

Speaker 1 (37:27):
But how does that equity become worse? Something. So in the startup world, typically it's through acquisition or IPO and there's no other outcomes. So you did quite a bit of work on the financial pieces that could potentially make this work. So how do investors or partners over the long run, if news is able to be a successful profitable business, how do they realize the results of their effort? Yeah, this is a tricky one. So certainly if there's a standard outcome in the startup world, like an acquisition or something, that's straightforward, I'm going to work on like other places, just the percentages would be different because again, we've given much more ownership to the staff, but if you are profitable, it's quite challenging. So I hope our listeners who have joined for discussions of gesture based product interfaces will forgive my aggression to the us tax law here. 

Speaker 1 (38:15):
But it's actually really important for how you compensate your staff. So tax and securities laws makes it quite hard for people, individuals to get cash out of a company like this. And I can kind of play through the different scenarios that we've thought about. So one thing we've considered is the idea of small-scale tender offers. This is where a company or someone else offers to buy shares from existing investors. And in that way, existing owners of the equity could get some liquidity and have cash to support their families, or what have you and small digression there. When I first encountered the term tender offer, I just thought it was the sweetest thing here. Here's an offer for you tenderly for your shares, but I don't think that's what it is. It's it's that they are tendering and offer. Right. But it basically just refers to an internal stock purchase, right. 

Speaker 1 (39:02):
A transaction where one person has some, and they're going to sell someone else on an open market transaction. And is that similar to, or the same thing as stock buybacks and kind of public companies? Yeah. So stock buy back would be buying the stock from the public, which I guess could conceivably be some of your staff if they own it on the public markets more as a tender offer, I associate that more with a more closely held private company and it's not a public transaction. It's more of a private offer to specific individuals to buy the equity. How does that relate to, we mentioned taking inspiration from the partnership model attorney firms and so on. And I think it's pretty standard there that when you're going to leave the firm, they buy you out, right. Even maybe with a restaurant, you know, you can imagine a couple of people in a restaurant, one person decides they've had it with business, or they're moving on to other things in life it's normal for one person to buy out the other person's steak. 

Speaker 1 (39:54):
Would that be a tender offer or something else? I suspect that's a little bit different because those are probably LLCs or otherwise not see corpse. And again, I associate under offer with basically with a Delaware C Corp. And that could, for example, even be written into the contract that not only are they going to offer to buy you out, but in fact, you have to sell at perhaps a formulaically determined price. So that way they might specifically not want the ownership to escape a currently active employees. For example, basically I think when you have LLCs or other non C Corp structures, things can get a little bit, we get are indifferent just because they're not as liquified and standardized in terms of how they operate, but there's some similarities in spirit of, okay, you've completed this part of your journey and you want to get some liquidity for that. 

Speaker 1 (40:36):
And the company has interest in acquiring that equity. And so it makes me do a sentence to do this transaction. Yeah, I guess they all seem similar to me in that typically an ownership stake in a private firm of any size is just totally non-liquid. You cannot really do anything with it. You can look at, okay, in theory, our last funding round valued us this amount, or I could take a multiple of revenue. The company's worth a million dollars and I have 50% of it. Yay. I'm a half a millionaire, but that's not really how it works because you can't actually sell those shares versus public markets, which of course is very good for liquidity in that way. And then an acquisition scenario where one company is buying a hundred percent of the stock of another company. And then you just divvy up that share price among the owners. 

Speaker 1 (41:19):
And that's why those two scenarios create exits for the investors or create ways to get liquidity for the investors and the employees who've taken options. But if you say, as we have said, you know, we don't plan to take either those paths. We want to build a profitable business that goes in perpetuity, making good software. Okay. Then how do I ever realize the outcome of my shares? And so the tender offering is says one mechanism as are these others we've mentioned for creating liquidity. Isn't the word for it, but just the mechanism for one person to sell their shares, to get out and get some money to someone else who's maybe more active in the business. Yup. Yup. And another nice thing about tender offers is they don't need to apply the same to every person by which, I mean, if it's just the case that you or someone else, because they're leaving or whatever wants to make this exchange, we could potentially set that up versus having to do something equally on the basis of current ownership and an example of something like that would be a dividend, which we can talk about. 

Speaker 1 (42:19):
Yeah. There's lots of like about a tender offer, but it's not something that we would do lightly. There's a variety of reasons. One is that you need quite a bit of capital for it to actually make sense for it to be material and for you to have an appropriate amount of cash in the bank, in the company, even after the transaction. So in that sense, it's definitely a ways out, but also, unfortunately there's all kinds of really weird tax consequences, which we don't need to go into the details here. But basically by doing a tender offer, you could potentially impair the equity of the other owners, if you do it wrong and do it at the wrong time or do it too much. So it's fairly fraught, but it's a potential thing out there. And another thing that we thought about and liked was dividends and dividends are nice because they're very mechanically fair, big fan of dividends. 

Speaker 1 (42:58):
Yeah. So just to define that, this is the idea that in a way it feels like almost the purest expression of capitalism or how businesses are supposed to work, which is when a company turns a profit, they can choose to take some portion of that profit. Some though reinvest back in the business kind of retained earnings. I think it's, what's said is usually called, but then the rest they say, Hey, we made some money. Let's share it with everyone who helped make this business happen. And that share is determined by your ownership in the company. And so for me, I had a, I guess, personal experience with this in my very first business, which was a, basically a bootstrapped business, a payment gateway called trust commerce. And we had been operating, I don't know, founders, you know, living on their own savings and whatever, just trying to pay our bills with whatever money came in or trying to pay the basic business bills, servers and offices and phones and stuff like that. 

Speaker 1 (43:49):
And I remember the first time we were left with a thousand dollars in the bank account that was not accounted for as well. What should we do with this? Well, we could pay ourselves. That'd be great. And so we wrote dividend checks for 300 bucks for each of us. Cause there was three people in the company and it felt really great. It felt like this. We made a product that people valued enough that there was a little bit leftover that then we could give to ourselves. And even though the number, the absolute number was small, that feeling of kind of profit in its purest form is a really nice one. And so dividends are just the idea that the company is making money. So you share it with the owners and that's something that's not really part of the startup world. And even not really as much a part of, I feel like equities, where I think they could usually call them growth stocks or something like this. 

Speaker 1 (44:34):
I'm probably speaking out of my wheelhouse here or income stocks or whatever, but the idea of just you're going to buy the stock in a company. So that then when that company makes money, they send you a dividend. Those are usually a lower return type of stock versus ones that are based on the growth of the stock itself. You buy it at a lower price, you sell it later for higher price, but the income stocks, again, that is business at its most pure and fundamental, which is the company made money. You own a piece of the company. Therefore you get a portion share of that. Yeah. And it's nice because it's mechanically fair. If you have a hundred thousand dollars to distribute in dividends, you look at the cap table, so-and-so has 5% great. They get a $5,000 check and you know that everyone is being treated fairly, at least in so far as the equity in the company is owned early and you don't need to have a lot of discussions and machinations about how you actually split up the cash, but dividends are challenging for their own reasons though. 

Speaker 1 (45:27):
One reason, for example, that you don't see a ton of dividends in the public markets is some companies don't have cash to throw off. A lot of that is currently instead of being dividends out, it's being used to buy back stock, which is kind of equivalent actually, but by basket, basically better tax treatment. So there's those esky tax laws again, causing weird distortions. But in our case, it's hard because some staff have straight stock and some staff have options. And that again is because of tax law. Basically the us government doesn't want you given straight stock to people. They view it as compensation that needs to be taxed immediately, even though it's a liquid. So basically to avoid bankrupting your staff, you have to give them options, but then options in a C Corp. When you dividend now you dividend to the stock owners, the straight up stock owners, not the option holders. 

Speaker 1 (46:11):
So that probably wouldn't be fair to them. The tax band here trying to levy income taxes on stock earned for work is very challenging because that stock has zero value when you get, and it's very likely to have zero value ever, but then in some cases it can be worth a lot, right? That initial stake that I don't know, you know, the Google founders had turned out to be worth a huge amount, but the vast majority of startups and even businesses will end up not being worth anything. So how do you tax something when you can't know its value except extremely retroactively. Yep. And I've had my own challenges with that because I've basically built a career around starting companies or advising for companies and taking equity and kind of have this, I don't know, flywheel of, I basically earned some money on past ventures and then I can use that to pay my bills or whatever and earn pure equity and future ventures and then not all of those pan out, but I kind of have a portfolio strategy. 

Speaker 1 (47:12):
You might say of, I own stock in companies I've started over the last decade or decade and a half as well as companies I've advised for, in some cases invested for. And so all of that income, all of that stock was worth zero when I got it. But much of it turns out to be worth zero ever, but then some of it turns out to be worth a good. And when I can cash that out, I can use that to pay my bills and continue with my career. But how do you tax that? Because typically you tax things at the time they're earned, but this can only be evaluated when it kind of resolves, which can be often 10 years later that a piece of stock you earned pans out and has a value that can be attached to it. So it's not an easy problem. 

Speaker 1 (47:51):
I think it's still an evolving area. Certainly the us tax law. I know Europe is grappling with this as well because it's just the standard models for how we think about income. Just don't fit well with us. Yeah. Definitely an area that's being worked on. It's just too bad that it hasn't been figured out yet in a way that'd be more advantageous to basically giving staff more compensation. Yeah. It can be frustrating, which is basically trying to do something that is fair as possible or investors and people earning what they call sweat equity. When they're essentially earning stock in exchange for their work. We cannot treat those the same because the tax law basically means that as you said, the people earning equity through sweat get screwed. And so then you have to create these different classes of stock and do different things. But then that effectively means you have more and more divergence in the stakeholders, which is against the spirit of what we're trying to do. 

Speaker 1 (48:44):
We're trying to create this thing where everyone's in it together. We bring different things to the table. Some people bring their efforts. Some people bring their money. Some people bring both, but everyone can hopefully have a sense of fairness in the sense of kind of knowing what you put in and knowing what you potentially get out or how to share in the success longterm. Yeah. And there are ways you could potentially work around this for dividends. You could do a sort of Phantom dividend where you say there's a hundred percent of the cap table and straight stock, and there's an additional 40% in options. You can dividend out 140 units, 40% of the option holders and a hundred percent to the stockholders and the stock would be straight dividends. And the option holders would get like a bonus basically to something like that. And you could even imagine doing more basically ad hoc type things like that, where you essentially make a formula and then do a bonus payout, but make it more formulaic, less, just like, oh, I think you did a good job this year. 

Speaker 1 (49:39):
Here's a check. And more, you have this sort of ownership in our current cap structure. And based on that, according to this formula, we're doing bonus pads like that, but that also gets messy because there is an element of discretion. And also when you're dealing with investors, they don't want to get a $17 check and you've got former employees, you've got to track down their address or whatever. This is a lot of weird mechanical stuff there. So I think realistically, it's, we gotta wait a few years and see how this all plays out and what the shape of the business is. But what we've done is we've filled up a lot of potential energy, a lot of ownership, a lot of equity with the staff members. And hopefully we can find a way to convert that into kinetic energy, to continue the analogy in the future. 

Speaker 1 (50:18):
And I'm pretty optimistic. It is asking the staff to trust us to a significant extent that we'll be able to figure that out and treat them fairly. But I'm pretty hopeful that we would be able to do something that's fair to everyone. So would you recommend a structure like this to someone else who wanted to start a company and, or do you imagine if you had to start a new company yourself today, would you reach for a structure like that? Yeah, well, we thought about this for a very long time and it was hard to come up and we spoke with a lot of experts and it was hard to come up with a better setup. So one way to think of this is insofar as we're talking about staff compensation, equity ownership, it's kind of in the standard Silicon valley model, but with the percentages dialed way in favor of the staff. 

Speaker 1 (51:00):
So in that respect, it's kind of strictly better, I would say, than the typical Silicon valley model. And so it can't be that wrong. It's probably better, at least for the staff, I would think. And we didn't talk about the other things that we do there in terms of very long exercise windows and more favorable vesting schedules and so on. But basically we've taken the standard mechanisms that are used in stock Delaware, C corpse, and turns the variables that we can. So there is as Pharaoh's as possible as staff. And I think at least that is a good thing. If you would have otherwise considered a standard Silicon valley model. The one other option that I do think is interesting is that I couldn't quite see ourselves going down was using more like a Phantom stock approach, where you have essentially an internal ledger. That's separate from the ledger that you have with Delaware in terms of the equity ownership in the company. 

Speaker 1 (51:46):
And it's on the basis of that internal ledger that you would make decisions about how you do pay offs. And there are some companies that are exploring this, you know, it's like every month you work with a company, you earn a point. And then if we ever do dividends, you would divide the dividend by the number of points. And that's how much we send you a check for him, something like that. That's nice, but it gives you a ton of flexibility, but it's much less precedented and it places even more trust in the company because you have less of the legal guard rails to confine what they can do and not do. So I think that's interesting because of the flexibility. And I would love to see people try that more, but I wasn't ready to establish a whole bunch of new case law just for the sake of this venture. 

Speaker 1 (52:21):
Uh, precedent is very important. There's the general business wisdom is try not to innovate on the model, focus on your product in your market, and don't get too caught up in company mechanics. It turned out that this was something that we were both passionate enough about in terms of a place we wanted to work. But also, I honestly do think we needed a different type of container, right? That we knew that as we talked about towards the beginning, there were an individual productivity tool and what you can sell for even at a pro-sumer price and what the mechanics are distribution and things look like they're versus other, you know, there's a reason why most venture funded stuff is either enterprise SAS or, you know, ad monetize consumer products. Those are models that work well with that funding style and the thing we wanted to express in terms of the product and thing we want to do exist in the world. 

Speaker 1 (53:10):
So it, as the company that we wanted to work at, I think just demanded a different model. I don't think if it would have worked with another one. So I think that was a way to justify as the ways in which we are deviating or innovating a little bit on the container side of it, but at the same time, exactly, as you said, I remember a lot of design choices we made and things like, you know, we'd love to give him plays options, or we'd love to give employees pure stock, but that's just way too hard or even impossible without these punishing tax consequences. So, okay. We'll kind of have these two classes of ownership in the company. That's not really the spirit of what we're doing, but like at some point you gotta bend a little bit to realities and what there's precedent for and what attorneys and accountants are used to working with and all that sort of thing. 

Speaker 1 (53:54):
Yeah. And I think in all of this, there's also a very real moral element where let's suppose the company is very successful some years from now, oh, the current and former staff are going to remember that we worked very hard to try to do the best we possibly could by them. They were like basically on all the email chains with the lawyers, more or less literally, and we would debrief and talk about, okay, here are the options that we have. What do y'all think is this worthwhile for you and things like that versus a model where that was all opaque. And there was not even an effort made to try to set things up as best as possible for the staff. I think that just helps people feel like they are being treated well. Hello. Speaking for myself, I am sometimes in the position of offering advice, let's say to folks who are thinking about what kind of vehicle they use for their business and kind of the muse approach does come up. 

Speaker 1 (54:40):
And certainly it's huge to ask, what are you actually trying to make because you need the right vehicle for what you're doing. If you need huge upfront capital or a big staff, I'm not sure this model can work to be honest, or if it's something that can be done with more of a small team when people two people in a shorter period of time, and maybe this is also not the right way to do it. And there's other kinds of vehicles as well. For example, I think the nonprofit is a little bit under utilized can be an incredible vehicle, even for software and technology products. You know, we know of maybe someone like Mozilla or the Apache foundation, there's many smaller examples such as processing foundation, which does this kind of generative art, coding tool, language thing. There's many others where I think if you think, okay, what we want to make is more open source or it's more of a, long-term kind of benefit, less of a, maybe it's more educational or maybe the target audience is not, you know, the mechanics aren't there for, for profit business. 

Speaker 1 (55:38):
Maybe you can make it work as a nonprofit. And again, there are more and more options for how you do that sort of thing these days between Patrion and so forth. So I think trying to think in terms of here's what I want to make and here's the team and the here's the place I want to work. And then here are some different types of containers. How does that fit in a particular what's the funding model? You know, if you're going to do the non-profit, you're going to be out essentially fundraising all the time because you're trying to raise donations and that works well. I think it works great for something like say Wikipedia and the Wikimedia foundation. They've made something very sustainable there and something that probably would not work the same if they had to come up with some for-profit business model. So I think the advice I give others, and then for myself and thinking of any thing I might do in the is think about what you want to do, and then be aware of the full range of options and not just go with the thing, you know, is if you started a nonprofit before and maybe that's, she knows he has started another loan and he started to start up before this. 

Speaker 1 (56:34):
She knows he has started another one, but actually there are a lot of options here. They each have their pros and cons or are more suitable to different kinds of products, markets, business models. So just try to pick something based on an informed look at those tools. Yep. And if I can put another spin on this, if you think about the full space of possibilities for how you accomplish a goal, there's one point, which is you're 100% focused on earning as much money as possible through a fast-growing for-profit venture. And if you make a heat map of where people currently spend their energy, there's this massive white hot, glowing spot, right there. There's so many zillions of startups trying to try every single angle and opportunity in that area. And so the marginal return to investing your personal time in terms of the impact on the world might be relatively smaller there. 

Speaker 1 (57:26):
Whereas there's this whole space that I feel like is really underexplored. And if you just make it about 80% making a profit and 20% making a statement that opens up all kinds of incredible opportunities, and then you can bring in these tools like maybe what you need is a for-profit. Maybe it's nonprofit. Maybe it's a community. Maybe it's an, I don't know, meme. Seriously. If you open yourself up to those possibilities, I think you have a lot more potential to have an impact just because so few people are considering that right now, well said, well, let's wrap it there. Thanks everyone for listening. If you have feedback, you can write to us by Twitter, as at ease at HQ, provide email as hello@museapp.com. You can also help us out by leaving a review on apple podcasts. And I'm hoping that there is a small giants to book somewhere in the far future arc. That muse might be included in it. If we can do this well enough, that'd be awesome. All right, till next time, see Adam.

