Speaker 1 (00:00):
The moment when you decide to no longer do your own support, naively, you think God has taking so much time. Primary reason to make the decision is to spend more time on the product as a developer, perhaps. But the side effects is that you lose all these direct touch points with your users, to the filtering of features, or what's really important. 

Speaker 2 (00:26):
Hello, and welcome to muse use as a tool for thought on iPad. This podcast, isn't about muse product. It's about muse the company and the small team behind it. I'm Adam Wiggins. And I'm joined today by mark McClenaghan, Adam and Alex Greek spore from agenda. Hello, 

Speaker 1 (00:43):
And Alex, I understand, in addition to being a company, founder and a product developer, you're also a musician. Well, that's a big one. It's a hobby. Anybody who has the run agenda, you know, that was my music. If you want to see it later. So yeah, there's a little video on the homepage there. And if he had play, you get some music in the background now that you were telling me that folks ask you, oh, where did you get that music from? And the answer is you made it yourself, right? Exactly. Yeah. I had two or three requests where I could find it on iTunes. And my wife is always saying, you should put it there, but not, you know, those are the Easter eggs. Oh, this is part of the fun of being an indie developer or a small team is you get to wear a lot of hats or do a lot of making of different kinds. Yeah. And spend a lot of time on things that the boys wouldn't have found justifiable living precisely. So 

Speaker 3 (01:38):
It's funny. I've had the opposite experience. We have some piano music and the video on our homepage and people ask me if they know I play the piano mark, is that you and the piano now I regret to inform you. I don't play that well, 

Speaker 1 (01:51):
Well, it's time to replace it. But notably, the other music in the amuse trailer, their launch trailer is one of your favorite pieces. That's one you've played. That's why we chose it. It's just performed by, let's say a professional. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. Well, Alex, I was really interested to talk to you because you work on this great app called agenda, which you described as date focused note taking. And some of the philosophies behind that I think are quite interesting as well as being a beautifully designed app and is one apple design awards and all that sort of thing. But maybe we could start with your background and especially I'm interested in your work on papers and how that kind of led you to agenda. Sure, sure. Yeah. I guess like I'm not a professional musician. I'm also not a professional app developer. I'm actually a biologist of training and that as a hobby, I started programming and that basically got out of hand and fast forward 10 years, and this is what I do now, but yeah, I started developing apps to help me in the lab. 

Speaker 1 (02:52):
We were in a biology wet lab environment and I always had an interest in working with apps like Photoshop, but never had gotten myself to programming. And then basically in the early two thousands, when Mac iOS 10 came out, that's when actually I started tinkering with the then new cocoa stuff and everything around programming that was newly introduced alongside my Colistin. And that basically then grew, started making apps for in the lab, sharing those all free. They were all free and we shared them on our website and that's basically how it all got started. And as I progressed, basically the apps became more complex and you know, in the next one and the next one, and then ultimately I wrote an app called vapors, which was kind of an iTunes for scientific research articles, PDFs. And that really kind of took off and allowed me to go full-time indie developer, basically. 

Speaker 1 (03:50):
Nice. And mark and I have worked a bit with scientific computing tools and kind of creating tools for scientists who are working in the lab. And one thing that struck me there, particularly in that maybe in this modern era of, I don't know what you call it, data science or whatever, but yeah, for biologists specifically. But I think the sciences in general, having some programming skills seems to be a super power, whether it's R or Jupiter notebooks or some of these more consumer ish tools, there's programming mat, lab, data, that kind of thing. You started there with kind of automation type things, because app development or Mac program development, I feel like that's a level up from what I think was the usual, a scientist that wants to crunch a few numbers. They've outgrown a spreadsheet a little bit. It seems like you jumped straight to the hard stuff. 

Speaker 1 (04:37):
Yeah. But it's interesting because actually for me, the hard stuff was exactly a lot of the things you mentioned. And I think the interesting bit is that actually I was not going from this area of, I need the program for my science, for my biology. I didn't really need any, I was not a data scientist. I was really a cell biologist doing microscopy work and I wasn't using any of the programming little scripting. I had done a little bit of scripting. I had made some web pages more as a hobby or as a, to earn some money as a kid, but nothing really special. I actually, in, in the contrary, right. I wasn't able to do any programming of any form, but it was always something that intrigued me. And I came always in from the more visual part. So I've taught myself a lot of Photoshops to, or video editing skills, that kind of stuff. 

Speaker 1 (05:29):
And I would love to make apps, but at the time it was like C plus plus and code warrior and all kinds of very difficult stuff. And I was like, no way, this is going to work. But then when apple released Mac OS 10, they kind of presented that new stuff, the new programming stuff that came from next at the time as a way that it would make it easy. So I was like, oh, maybe somebody like me can, I'll actually make an app. And I started looking at it. It actually bought the book at the time, there was this one book about it that they then advocated as that's how you learn it. And I was like, oh cool. Now I can finally make these apps. And I started reading it within three pages. I realized, no, this is just feel serious programming, you know, but I was motivated enough by then to kind of really buy a book on C and kind of dig into it and put my teeth in it and really go through the hard part till the point where I could go back to that original book that I bought and actually got enough to get going. 

Speaker 1 (06:26):
So I never used any scripts or I never felt like I could use it in my science actually. And that's the interesting bit because I made apps that I consider not scientific apps in a way, because you could better describe them as consumer apps for scientists, right? So you have kind of two types of apps or two types of programming. You know, you have kind of two types of program. One is for your scientific work. And usually there, it's just a matter of getting the shortest route to your results. You're not making something for general purpose. You just want to get to a result it's just for you. And probably the code itself is throw away cause we really want to exactly. And this is the opposite. This is kind of a consumer product. It's a product you're working towards a rounded off thing that others can use. 

Speaker 1 (07:16):
It's a completely different type of programming and papers. You know, of course I'll link the homepage in the show notes there, but you've got, for example, PDF reading and annotation on the iPad with the apple pencil, other features that certainly sound familiar to muse users. Do you have any big takeaways from building a product sort of serious productivity tool with heavy document capabilities that ran on the iPad among other places? What were your big takeaways from working on a product like that for however many years he did. Yeah. We'll have to go back to how it started and how it kind of also think, I guess I always think what is the problem that I like to solve, right. And I almost always, well always, basically a problem that I have. And so I always make the app for myself as the first customer or the first user. 

Speaker 1 (08:04):
And in the case of this PDF reader, we were in the middle of the transition to PDF, right before that you would go to the library of your research Institute and you would literally photocopy articles from paper versions. And when I joined that Institute, there was just this transition going on. What year was the transition from paper to digital around 2019, between 1995, certainly a while ago in internet time, but really not so long ago. Yeah. And the interesting thing was that we went through this same, exactly this parallel with MP3s, you know, when Napster came out and these apps, you would have all these files on your desktop and you would have an app that basically would play those files. But when app, you were still very actively busy, wait an app in combination with files, lose files. And I choose kind of solve that by creating a shoe box app that took away all the kind of concept of a file and just basically bring the real concepts there, which is Elburn artists song. 

Speaker 1 (09:10):
Right? And so I was thinking, we need that in science, basically an app that basically lets us search for author for journal and basically all these concepts instead of having these PDF files everywhere. And so I was at apple conference in 2004, probably and apple introduced a technology for a database. They introduced the technology for a PDF reader and spotlight, which was to able to index PDFs. And I was like sitting in new Orleans like, well, those are the three components that we need to create a shoe box app for creating that Napster for research or that I choose for research, I have to say. And so that's how the idea came involved basically. So it's about thinking about the solution or the problem that you have, and then I'm able to see these components and then be able to kind of assemble the puzzle basically. 

Speaker 1 (10:05):
And I think that is the Genesis of a lot of great technology products is a new technology comes along, but then someone who's familiar with the domains sees how that, or in combination with other technologies can be put together to do something new that you couldn't do before. Yeah, that's it, it's not necessarily new because iTunes did this for music. So it's not that I invented the idea of a shoe box app, but I could see that that's what we need, but translated to this domain. Right. And that's, I think we're still a lot can happen in innovation. So it seems like that one was pretty successful. I'd love to hear about the journey that took you from there to your current work on agenda. Well, in a nutshell, it's the same kind of process because what happened was that fortunately papers became very successful. 

Speaker 1 (10:52):
It allowed me to at some point decide, well, this is what I'd like to do all day. I was doing up until that point, everything in evening hours. But I looked at some point, like we got so much feedback. It was so motivating. I got so much drive to continue working on it. And in the meantime I had started making money. We did, and it was surpassing my postdoc salaries or you're like, well, I can do this the entire day and live from it. And you know, that's a very easy decision to make. So then it continued to grow. I worked alone at first and a friend of mine joined me and it kind of organically grew to about six people at which point. And that was in 2012. One of the bigger scientific publishers approached me and said they wanted to acquire papers. And so they bought it and I joined the company and we continued growing the team. 

Speaker 1 (11:45):
And at that point, my role became more and more manager than so much being an indie developer, certainly no indie anymore, but you know, also not to any development at some point anymore. And yeah, I just realize I'm, Mazzerati go back to that original phase. So I decided to end the journey also because I had left lab and scientific area for by then about a year or 10. So I've wanted to focus again on something that really was a solution for a problem that I had. Right. So kind of back to that original setup. But interestingly, when I was at that bigger company, I had started hitting all the problems also that came back. Basically I was kind of transplanted back in these early days of a new career and you start hitting new problems for which you're going to think of new solutions. And that's basically where it ended. 

Speaker 1 (12:38):
He came out of right. You basically traded your job as a lab scientist for a job as a manager of a small team and company. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. And then you hit very totally different problems and different issues and you start thinking, okay, what is the solution for this problem? And I kind of naturally start to think about it. It's interesting guys. I never fought about it really, but for, in case of the PDs, I started organizing those PDFs. I started as manually renaming them, manually putting them in folders and I, then this kind of stuff, so that you start searching already in a very kind of primitive way for small solutions. And in a very similar way, when I, when I was becoming a manager, I started in a very primitive way, starting to develop methods of keeping track of what's what's going on, keeping track of who I should talk to. 

Speaker 1 (13:29):
And what I had talked about with people, what the agenda for the next meeting should be, that I had with my team every week, et cetera, and the way of note taking and that methodology, I started to evolve to the point where I was like, well, that methodology works really well. And I can see other people in my team not doing that kind of stuff so well. So they could definitely benefit from this solution that I have kind of invented as a big word, but developed basically. And then that's where I felt like when I leave this place, I'm gonna, you know, take that kind of approach and just put it in the form of an app that then becomes much more accessible to anybody really well. And that's precisely what caught my attention about agenda and brings us to our topic today, which maybe I'll call time-based notes or you talk about date focus, note taking. 

Speaker 1 (14:19):
And I guess the meta element there, since we're philosophical on this podcast is that I feel that there's this, I don't know, type of product. It's not even a category, but an approach which is taking a philosophy or a way of working and then baking that into a piece of software. So basically it started by just a simple realization that I should just always have a place to take my notes and seeing that, not even that is what a lot of people do. So it started by, I started just using text edit and I always had already, when I was programming, always had these kind of four or five text edit documents, open one for each of the apps I was making, for instance, where I would get an idea and then just put it in, but also put stuff there. When I found a certain bug or something that I should really add. 

Speaker 1 (15:08):
It was kind of a living document that kind of organically shaped what I was going to work on and more also as a way to calm the mind of, you know, knowing that you have reserved some ideas or some order and where you can find what you need to go back to, et cetera. Yeah. The mind calming thing is a big part of the getting things done. I said, ology, I always loved the term open loop. The concept of, if you feel like there's something you have to keep in your mind that you're keeping that alive, it's consuming mental bandwidth. If you have a place to put it, but importantly it has to be a place to put it that you trust. We will be resurfaced at the time. You need it. However you define that. So, yeah, big fan. And I think it's one of the most important parts of note taking. 

Speaker 1 (15:51):
And then that kind of was a natural thing to do for me. So when I moved into this kind of managing role, I just created instead of one for beaks, one for papers, one for enzyme max, I just created these kinds of similar documents, but now for our weekly team meeting or for the marketing thing, or for talking with my boss and et cetera. And from there, it evolved into a way where I kind of naturally say, okay, I need to separate the previous meeting from this one. So I would just add the top. I would create a, basically just with a few equal signs, like, okay, that was kind of last one. And on the top I started adding some empty new lines where I could basically, okay. That's where I would naturally keep the notes for the next meeting. And then I started realizing that actually works well because now I can go back in time as well, because out automatically as every time I add new stuff at the top stuff that kind of is from the previous meeting sinks to the bottom, but it kind of therefore becomes kind of a paper trail of what you discussed in your last meeting and the one before and one before. 

Speaker 1 (16:51):
And that just started to evolve in a little bit more formal way where I would just have kind of like a domain language, right. Where he would just say, okay, I always start with a plus sign at the title or the date of the meeting. And then I have some topics that are discussed, et cetera, as I became almost like a quite nicely formatted document, basically with exactly an entire history of all the team meetings that we had, which I realized very valuable because at some point, even people from my own team would come and say, okay, yeah, well, last time we agreed this and this and this. And I was like, no, look, I can even go back last time we discussed this. And before that we did this and et cetera, and of course I was working remotely and then it naturally kind of fits that because you will have a Skype call or a zoom meeting and you always have that text document next to it. 

Speaker 1 (17:41):
And so you would be very good at note taking more better in a way than doing it in present, right? Because then you don't want to sit behind a laptop or anything. My managerial life, I had a similar technique, not nearly as structured and elegant as what you're describing, but it was really based on the person. And this is often connected to one-on-ones or if there's a particular team planning meeting, then I have a text file that's named after that team and kind of running log where the newest stuff is up top. Yeah. But yeah, the idea is as a manager, your context shifting constantly, and if you've got 30 meetings throughout the week, including one-on-ones and whatever, and then yet you don't want to spend the first, I don't know, 15 minutes trying to re ramp up on the context. 

Speaker 3 (18:21):
Yeah. Yeah. And Adam, you mentioned this idea of, I think you called it open loops where you want things to be written down so that you have space in your head. And I always find that so important because it's so deceptive when you don't write something down, your head is full and you're saying, oh, look, my head in fact can contain all the things that I want to be thinking about. It's just perfectly full happens to be. But in fact, when you go to write something down, you create space and other things enter your mind, which you didn't even realize you needed to be thinking about. And you couldn't have, unless you had rejected some of the other stuff by writing it down or some other means, 

Speaker 1 (18:52):
Um, it's almost like a Parkinson's law kind of thing. What's that Parkinson's law is. I usually think of it as referring to hard drives, but it can also refer to closets, I think as well, which is if you have a storage space, you will somehow magically acquire the number of things necessary to fill that space. So if your hard drive is certain size, you will somehow always fill that your closet a certain size will somehow. And how has it just so that I have exactly the number of clothes or whatever that this closet, and of course, actually the causality flows the other way. And I think another interesting aspect of it is when you think about writing versus thinking, writing, certainly handwriting is a slow process, right? So compared to how fast we can think. So I think it even helps when it comes to writing down your thoughts and typing them. 

Speaker 1 (19:39):
There's a number of processing steps to really, okay, how am I going to write it down? Because it's always, it needs to kind of be more neat. You have to form proper sentences instead of just some terms that go through your mind that you need to think, how am I going to write it down, then you need to actually write it down. And in that process, your brain is just faster thinking about all kinds of things that come in. And so I think it's helps really in the creative process. And like you say, mark, that it brings up other thoughts that you hadn't thought about. You get new ideas. As you write down a sentence, it can really generate this idea of you feel like an idea generation machine, because while you're typing, you're always like I need to die faster just to think all these other things that now come up. 

Speaker 1 (20:19):
That's also great. I asked that very often actually, and this whole process helps in that, putting it down on paper. That's one of these things. But what I found interesting is that you mentioned, I also have this kind of process. It looks a bit, I wasn't so organized as you, and you also mentioned earlier, you know, how did you kind of form it into a general thing? It's a very interesting process. What happened with the agenda? Because when I left this company, I was like, okay, I'm going to put this workflow exactly like that in the form of an app. So I pitched it to a really good friend of mine, not a fellow indie dev Dru McCormack, who I was, would meet up a few times a year. And he had one set. If you leave this bigger company, maybe we can do something together. 

Speaker 1 (21:05):
And I had this, okay, is this a great idea for an app? And I feel that I needed it, but I felt like when I met him, I'll just pitch the idea to him. And he said, yeah, I think it makes sense. Despite the fact that there are bazillion other note taking apps already out there. And I said, why don't we do it together? So we started working on it and we made the app exactly. Kind of follow this workflow that if you would say, okay, this meeting is done, it would automatically create a new note for that meeting at the top, which would be called next, which was displays where you could put things out. So effectively really literally it would, the way I worked and what we saw there is then when we worked off there one and a half years, we basically brought it into the first health hub or beta that we would send out to friends. 

Speaker 1 (21:51):
And it was like a handful and nobody got it. And they were like, what's this? You know, because it was this okay, but why is this note appearing at a top? And it was just two months my way of doing it. Then you go into the whole topic of how generic should it be, versus how much should it be steering towards a certain workflow or a certain way of doing things. And it was definitely something from day one that we experienced the struggle basically to do it in a very opinionated way or very generic way. And I think that's one of the biggest challenges with software that tries to bake in process. You can certainly have either for a personal piece of software, what we usually call situated software or you're building. I used to do consulting for basically ERP consulting for enterprise customers. And we would just come in and they would tell us the process. 

Speaker 1 (22:40):
We would write software that exactly encoded that. Yeah. But it was never intended to be used by anyone else. And so then if you go and try to bring that to something and make it more general purpose, it may not fit with what everyone else needs or wants. And I feel like this is especially so in project management software, I've written some of that over the years and I've also seen plenty of others and there's this very natural tendency to your company or your team, or you as a person have a way to manage projects. It's worked really well for you and you think, great. I want software that exactly and codes that go to make that. And then it's not really usable by others. And what you probably want is something that has more, some building blocks that can be combined in different ways. 

Speaker 1 (23:25):
But I agree it's a very tricky in some cases, just trade off where you just have to make a choice between opinionated versus open-ended, but maybe there's other places where you can have clever moves where there's building blocks. That can be combined together in a way that reflect a worldview or a philosophy or way of working, but also gives you some flexibility mix and match, customize your environment. That's exactly how we basically then went, right. We need to make one step back and make this something more generic, but as still would allow somebody like me to build that workflow using the building blocks that agenda provides, but others might not even want to use any dates. So you can use agenda just as a replacement of the notes app, for instance, without ever bordering about dates and you can build all kinds of workflows. And that's great. 

Speaker 1 (24:18):
And I think that's what a lot people like. And actually it's funny because earlier today there was exactly the comment that somebody made and user made. Like it's so flexible. I love the flexibility of agenda, but you need to limit the number of buildings being purposely limited, the building blocks to make them kind of general purpose. So you get basically a Lego for your note taking workflow, basically, you know, and so you can build your own way, but that leaves you with the problem that now, how do you get back to those people that don't have those workflows developed that maybe are not aware that they need to do it and just maybe are not that kind of reflective on how to build such a workflow. So that's where we are pretty much. Now I just think that you start thinking again, okay. Back to that person that wasn't taking notes or that wasn't really able to kind of structure his thoughts for a meeting. 

Speaker 1 (25:09):
How can you help them without enforcing, basically setting them up in agenda in a way that really works well for them and how do you let them discover it is the way that works really well for them. So I think that's where a lot of my faults go right now, as the basic building blocks for our agenda are pretty much in place. And you start getting at the point where it's more important again, to start thinking about how do you teach people to find a great way to really feel like, oh man, this app is that I can't live without this app because it's my go-to for all my ideas. It's how I structure my thinking. It's where I find everything I've done in the past, et cetera. Right? Yeah. This 

Speaker 3 (25:45):
Is a problem that Adam and I have grappled with before the way of working or getting at problem, you have a product, but you need to approach it in a certain way for it to be fully useful. So I'm curious what exactly are the techniques that you're using to communicate these ideas to your customers and potential customers? 

Speaker 1 (26:02):
Yeah. So the first thing we do is when you start the app, I thought it was really important that we show, what is this app going to do? And why is it different from the other note taking apps? So it kind of set the general stage. What is it? What is it not? And so we have a little animation that just kind of tells you, okay, it's a note-taking app and there's these different aspects to it. And it also show kind of the weaknesses of other types of apps. And then you have an kind of general onboarding sequence of a few slides, just show you, okay, this is where you find this and that. But one of them, I think most important things that we also shipped, um, example documents, which are, again, I think one of these that comes close to that music stuff where you maybe spend a lot of time or fun on, but they actually are very useful and they show you kind of a few models of working that they can be inspiring. 

Speaker 1 (26:56):
And then the last that's kind of where we leave you in the app. I very consciously brought back from the early papers days, which we overtime lost, but I figured that was actually a really big loss is that we embedded a community forum inside of agenda. You can access it through if you go to a agenda.community, but it's built in the app so you can access it from there. And that creates a group of users that also talk on purposely, I added a section called talk where I invite people to discuss their workflow. So of course it has an how to section, which is kind of a manual living manual. It has a feedback section and a support, but it has also this talk section where we basically say, just let us know how you use agenda and describe your workforce. And it's been a fantastic resource of all kinds of people describing how they work, which techniques they use from GTD to settle costume, to all kinds of things and all kinds of topics. But also like I'm a teacher. I use agenda like that. And that's been a great resource, I think. And we send a lot of people to that. It tells a lot how you do it. That's super interesting because we've long suspected 

Speaker 3 (28:12):
Slash seen slash argued that people mostly learn tools socially, as much as we invest in manuals and onboarding and stuff, mostly people learn from other people and for more enterprise oriented tools like notion or Atlassian, there's a natural contagion vector, which is you're at the same company you're working on the same project together. You're in the same meeting and for very widely used individual focus tools. You can also get that. Please have a sort of critical mass where there's enough people to spread the ideas around. But for these more indie independent individual user focused tools, it could be hard to get that social contagion going, but you have a sort of a neat mechanism here with the built-in community into the app to help encourage that. That's very 

Speaker 1 (28:52):
Cool. Yeah. And there's one aspect that also keeps me busy a lot, which is that is very common. Actually. There are people that love agenda right. In support or the forums that it's basically the second time they try agenda before they really like it. So I get a lot of feedback that is like, you know, a year ago I tried the agenda. I didn't get it or it didn't work for me now. I got back to it and I absolutely love it. And so you're starting, okay, what is it that the second time around they got? Is it because they saw indeed somebody else working with it? Is it because they come to the app and a lot of kind of wrong assumptions have been cleared by that first try. And is it because of the communities? Probably a whole mix of things, but I think part of that is what you described there. 

Speaker 1 (29:41):
Yeah. I'm just flipping through your community forum bed here. And I notice it's sort of a mix. There's both topics initiated by community members. Like you'd mentioned people talking about subtle Caston or other kind of note taking methodologies, but I see you also post product updates there, or something happens like there's some external and external review or something like that. That's sort of all ends up there. And even, it seems like maybe use this as essentially, instead of having a company blog writing kind of standalone web articles, they basically just go into this forum and they're part of the conversation. Yeah. We don't have a company blog. This is also our blog. I have a bunch of tutorials there. This hall, for instance, there's a, if you search for next box, you basically get this entire story about with images and stuff of how this whole thing started. 

Speaker 1 (30:28):
Even including some screenshots from the first beta, it was kind of so badly received, et cetera. So, yeah, and even as plugs yesterday, somebody wrote in, I was really surprised as some person wrote an entire article, huge article about the whole topic of backlinking and different types of approaches, you know, as a graph kind of representation of your notes. And there's a group of people that just love writing up these things. There's a great kernels of discussions and they teach you how they see it and they teach others how they can use it. And they help others discovering these workflows of how to organize their fault. And that same article that I just mentioned of this person use writing as a huge kind of overview of all the tools that are there, including a lot of our competitors, but I don't mind because he did write a really great summary because he was mentioning this aspect of that is note taking is not so much about writing, but it's more about the structuring of the thinking process. 

Speaker 1 (31:32):
Basically note-taking is about the thinking process of where you place things, how you organize things. And it's also, I think still goes one step further because you see all these discussions about, oh, this app does it like that. And in this app, I can, I have a corkboard and in this app I can link and know, and this app can do that. And this app icon. And I think a lot of these discussions tend to go about what app can do and you know, program B can do and what others can't and you kind of feature tick boxes and stuff. While I think it focuses way too much on what exactly an app can do and how it works. It's much more about how do we get people to find a way to structure your thoughts, to find his way, where you feel that you have everything in your brain organized and you can find back things and you can be really creative because you know, you have this capacity for it in a place to put things and everything. 

Speaker 1 (32:28):
So yeah, definitely more about the process. And I'd like to focus in a way more and more on that. And the community is a way to stimulate that, to be a lot of that thinking process happens there. And it's nice that you create not just the app, but also the community around it that helps people to discover new ways of better ways of organizing themselves and take better notes for instance, and et cetera. So, yeah, it's a really important part of the app. Actually. I also find it really interesting that it's both on the web, which of course something like a forum really should be, but you also have it in the app, sort of that dual access means it's right there at hand, but it's also searchable. So I assume there's some element of people finding these interesting articles through the web. Like they would accompany blog, but now they see the whole community discussion and they can follow that and see how rich the community is. 

Speaker 1 (33:20):
Exactly. But then if it's right there in the app, you probably are more likely to get people using it. Then if it was standalone web forum a year ago, I guess maybe you were hiding that, but for sure the term SEO went through your head and yeah, fair enough. You know, the marketeer things, I like that, oh, that's great content because it's Google index it. And if they search for this, they will find agenda. Of course. But for me, those are the kind of byproducts because what I see more is that people come to the community and because it's so actively embedded and referred to in the app. And then when somebody contacts us in support, we point to it and et cetera. So we always kind of inward point to that community, but it gives this also this great impression about, oh, this is a nice place to be right. 

Speaker 1 (34:11):
As a user, it gives us some kind of feel of if I use this app, I'm part of a group that can help me, or if I have a problem with the app or if I can discover new things or as valuable for me. And we see that back in the review comments because we live there too. I mean, I'm there and drew, we are there all the time. We answer everything we take part in those discussions, which means that you get in your reviews on iTunes, you get back, you know, these developers, listen, these developers are there. They're transparent about what's coming up. We know what's going to happen. They feel empathy for being small developers. So they understand when you have to say no to a lot of things, et cetera. So it's a way to really be there as well. So it has many aspects beyond being just a community forum in a way or a discussion board or something. 

Speaker 1 (35:04):
And actually I mentioned his article. Maybe you can point to that video that I put with this article that is describing the whole next book's ID, because I did an iOS talk where I actually talked about that and about what I call kind of side effects. So for instance, we had a forum in early papers one, and it was a great place. That's why I knew it worked, but we got riddled with spam and with some nasty people. And so what happens is that if you don't have the tools to manage that in the beginning, you'll have, let's say a thousand users and there's one guy is nasty. Okay, you can handle that one guy. But if you now grow 10 times, now you have 10 nasty guys, right? At some point it's becomes hard to handle. If your forum doesn't really support you in that. 

Speaker 1 (35:51):
And so it started to becoming a bit of a nasty atmosphere in some cases and the spam. And so at some point you said, I'll just take so much time. Let's just pull it out. But you not only lose the forum and where people could support, but as a side effect, you know, the SEO part is one side effect. The fact that that's where we meet and logistic users that help us translate the app in 10 languages, which is all voluntary work done through people that felt that they were part of the community. And when we said, Hey, we're going to translate the app who wants to contribute. And I've got some people there. They're amazing. It's super high quality. If we have an update, they translate everything within no time, all gained through that. There's are all side effects. You can think so many ways your new features that you discovered there, your ideas, your sample documents, your anything, there's so much stuff coming out of that. 

Speaker 1 (36:44):
That's amazing. And we tend to think of like, okay, what's the primary reason our to manual and some kind of support help. If you make the decision to kill such a community, for instance, based on those two things, then you forgot that there is this long tail that probably is worth equally or more even than all these main primary reasons. And that you can base the decision to say that case in papers, we stopped the community. And I see that pattern everywhere that you kind of focus on the two, three things that you think are the most important in a decision. And there are so many side effects that you throw away or that you affect by that decision. There are easily to underestimate effectively the side effect element of you have this thriving community that you really participate actively in, and you do a lot of work to make that a welcoming place, but also place you post updates about the product and your own usage and your journey and so forth. 

Speaker 1 (37:42):
That reminds me of, we had Lisa ankle on the podcast sometime back under this topic of authentic marketing. And I guess the idea there was that there's this crass way to think about marketing. I think like SEO that you mentioned earlier, that search engine optimization, which is this very kind of reductive. Okay. If I make content in the very generic sense that people will Google something and they might find my website and then that might lead them to try my product and purchasing it. And that's all true, but that, like you said, you're focusing on the side effects that really, I think the primary effect is make a great community, be your authentic self, engage with your users. Talk about why you're passionate about this. Talk about what's coming for the product. And I think that's also something indie developers have that you don't get with bigger companies. 

Speaker 1 (38:30):
You, the individual and your colleagues can be there directly interacting with the users as opposed to a larger product where you have millions of users and the company has hundreds of employees. You just can't have that. And that's something an indie developer can do this quite big. Yeah. For instance, another good example is the moment when you decide to no longer do your own support, naively, you think God, that's taking so much time. Primary reason to make a decision is to spend more time on the product as a developer, perhaps. But the side effects is that you lose all these direct touch points with your users, to the filtering of features. What's really important. You get ideas from there, you miss opportunities that come up are being mentioned, reviews or collaborations and stuff. So you go, I'll throw it away with it. And those are all the side effects of doing your own support and answering these people yourself. 

Speaker 1 (39:27):
I mean, if there's one big example, that's what's happened at Alonso, right? So we have this kind of odd SLAs, a unique business model with agenda. And when we launched the agenda, that business model had almost gave us equal amounts of attention as to the fact that we had the new product itself. Right? So I think half of the news outlets that kind of talked about agenda when we launched were probably wouldn't even have mentioned us or very little if it was just not a note-taking app, because, you know, maybe they were just thinking it's nothing really special or anything, but because we had that plus a completely kind of new business model, or at least something that people hadn't done before, they were like, oh, we need to talk about this and et cetera, et cetera. We, of course we never went there to think, oh, let's do a new business model because that will give us as a tensor. Let's get pressed by having a weird business model. That's probably not what you're thinking. No, that's not exactly what the way at least I was trained, but it's perfect example of how the side effects can be used. Right. I mean, it reminds me always of medication, right? It's really those kind of side effects and side effects can be used. So, you know, more important than the actual medication. This 

Speaker 3 (40:42):
Is an example of something we talked about on the previous podcast on small giants where just by virtue of being a little bit different, you unlock a lot of potential energy. Yeah. Do you think that's fair or not? It is what it is 

Speaker 1 (40:54):
Definitely. Yeah. And that also comes to where yeah. Being kind of Indy. However you want to define that opens up just the ability to do weird stuff, to be off the beaten path, to take your own. It's no longer designing for the mass market or designed by committee or whatever else that you can do. Whatever weird thing you have to express in your soul. And you know, that may or may not actually work in terms of the business. Maybe it doesn't resonate with other people, but at least for me, I get a lot of joy. When I see an Indy piece of software, that's just doing something weird, different expressing something, whether or not it speaks to me, just the fact they are doing something unique and different. And I think the world is big enough now. Certainly the oral software is big enough now that we can have a million tiny niches and a million interesting little pieces of software that are going to resonate with some relatively small portion of the population, but that's enough to sustain the team. 

Speaker 1 (41:51):
Absolutely. Yeah, exactly. It will. Being able to do weird things. Makes me think of a little story. You told me earlier, Alex, about the agenda homepage, which I love this little animation, kind of a CSS JavaScript animation thing that has a rising and setting sun and moon going over kind of what looks like a little mountainous island, uh, would love to hear that story for our listeners, pencil islands. That in a way it's just a, another example where the whole just discussed. And it's also this process of how Fords grow as you work on them, right? So if you leave these faults in your brains, you've kind of think they're done or they don't evolve so much, but if you start writing it out or in this case create actual, you know, in this case images or things that you can see and share with others, it starts to flow. 

Speaker 1 (42:44):
So what happened in this particular case when we were busy with the app, you always have this kind of empty shoe box problem, which is if you start an app and you say, even I don't want those sample documents, the app is empty. So you're looking at the completely empty screen, the blank page problem. I think that's usually called well, in this case, it's just aesthetically. It looks horrible. You know, it was like, why have I got this big wide window because of the app it's natural. We already designed it extremely kind of clean, empty, right? Without any Chrome from the brow know anyway. So I asked the designer that we always work with is also a good friend of ours from SLO I, as a Marcelo. Can you make us some kind of placeholder image that will show when the app is empty or when you don't have a selection? 

Speaker 1 (43:28):
And they said, sure. And the natural place to start was to start with the icon. And we have kind of settled down on the icon being a pencil tip. So the idea is the app's called agenda as, so it's an a and a kind of nicely can be transformed into also being doubling as a pencil tip. So that's the icon of the app. So he puts a big icon based a big pencil as the placeholder image and it wasn't working really well. And then the next day he came in, I was playing a little bit, I guess he just had a few layers on or something. And he discovered that if he put a few of those pencil tips in different sizes next to each other, you basically got kind of what is an island. And the other element that we have in the app is when you put something on the agenda, which is kind of the equivalent of flagging note as being important. 

Speaker 1 (44:18):
And we use a simply orange dots as the kind of way to signal that. And so he started realizing that that could double as a sun above that island. And this was how this kind of little scene was born. So that was going to have a nice placeholder and yeah, we liked it. So he kind of proposed that you could even have like a moon for a kind of a night scene. I don't know how he got there, but basically I started thinking actually, you can really make the scene kind of dynamic in it as the day progresses. You can actually put the sun in a certain different location. And then at night it becomes nighttime and became kind of a dynamic scene. And it was just, again, one of these things where you spend too much time on, I actually, there is literally fees of code in the app and that I found somewhere to kind of calculate where the sun should be more or less at which time of the day. 

Speaker 1 (45:07):
So if you search in, so does this mean if I load up agenda here in Germany in the winter time, the sun will actually only be up for a smaller portion of the day and in the summertime, the sun and the sort of the apple show size version for much longer. Yeah. It's quite accurately knows what time the sun sets. So if you search for something, you can't find it. At least you get the island scene. If you do that in the morning, you see sunrise. If you do it in the afternoon, you see sun beaking and in the night that you get stars and even the final Easterday a case at the, even the moon phase is kind of accurate. And whether it's full moon or north anyway, that was kind of the fun air. And then one of the things that kind of saw was it's kind of a little bit of a ying yang thing, right? 

Speaker 1 (45:53):
It's not always kind of goes on and you have kind of a Nighthawk and a day Hoff. And at the same time I was working on his intro movie and I was thinking, we want to kind of say, there's some apps that know everything about the future, right? So it's like your task managers and everything, but then when you actually check off these items, they kind of disappear into nowhere. And there's other apps that of know everything about your past, which is journal apps. Journaling apps is where you keep track of everything I did today, but there are very little concept of future. So you get this kind of yang yang kind of do sides of the story. And I figured that that's, it's really nice with this little island scene, because then you can say one app does this. And in the meantime, the sun goes up and down. 

Speaker 1 (46:35):
And then at the other apps, it's kind of a dark side. You have the light in the dark side in a way. So it felt this kind of, it would make great for that animation. And so that's what you see on the homepage right now. And it all came out of that. Then it starts to grow because then you're like, okay, we need to have some sample documents. One of the sample documents is about somebody who visits the pencils islands and depends on islands featured everywhere. If you go on our community and our sample documents, even our latest release where we edit tables, you know, the Amos I made basically contains a table with a list of hotels, which are basically depends on island hotels. I'm on five stars and a beach cabin for three stars, et cetera. Right? So it kind of provides this kind of coherent thing or, or kind of creative Colonel where you hang up a lot of things too. And now when you buy the app, you get fireworks loans from the island. We introduced referrals and that's model that. If I say, Hey, Adam, you should try out the agenda. You get a bunch of tickets to the island. And if you kind of registered a river, all basically a boat arrived at the island is I, it creates his entire character. All started out with just asking for a place holder. What a lovely story. Well, let's wrap it there. 

Speaker 2 (47:53):
Thanks everyone for listening. If you have feedback, write us on Twitter at Aesop HQ, provide email hello@museapp.com. You can help us out by leaving a review on apple podcasts and Alex, I hope I'll see you on pencil island. I hope you guys are there as well. All right, thanks so much for coming on the show tears.

